todo:

- ive added a partner system for random list. can we use it anywhere else?
- need consequences for unhappy crew
- need consequences for no meds (check this)
- consume grog when run out of water (test this)
- Save/load should include random number info so we get proper generation (check this)
- come up with a way to render the world map in chunks or something, this would allow us to make a bigger world
- add other cargo types for items gotten at sea and on land exploring:
  - oil - comes from sea creatures
  - fish - caught at sea
- quests integrate
- consumption
  - consume medical at a fixed rate. if crew is unhealthy its consumed at a higher rate
    maybe after battle, an even higher rate?


Some maybe outdated info:
- wind
  - wind may be blowing from one of the 8 directions and may be one of these strengths (and likelihoods):
    - none (not blowing) 5%
    - light breeze 30%
    - steady wind 50%
    - strong wind 15%
  - change wind direction randomly once per day. wind direction will change either one directional degree in either
    direction or will stay the same direction. eg if coming from NE may change to N or E or stay NE
  - change strength once per day
  - wind affects ship speed:
    - direction interacts with sailing direction
      - same direction as wind is blowing = 1.5
      - opposite direction as wind = 0.5
      - one point off same dir = 1.25
      - two points off same dir = 1.0 (will be same as 2 pts off opposite)
      - one point off opposite = 0.75
    - wind strength is a multiplier for directional value
      - none - no progress is made
      - light = 0.8
      - steady = 1.0
      - strong = 1.2
    - example: one point off same dir with strong wind = 1.25 * 1.2 = 1.5
      therefore 24 knots * 1.5 = 36 knots


reminders:
why does an island not have cargo available that it produces? it might consume all it produces


period facts:
1 knot is 1 nautical mile per hour
merchant ships at this time could sail at a speed of 4 to 8 knots
a good telescope might extend visibility to several miles, possibly up to 10 miles or more under favorable conditions.
The largest merchant ships were the East Indiamen, in three broad classes, of 1200 tons, 800 tons, or 500 tons.
This page has some info on ships:
https://www.mq.edu.au/macquarie-archive/journeys/ships/vessels.html

score:
score is based on number of days survived, and number of quests completed as well as assets, level of ship upgrades.

end of game:
the game ends when
  - player sinks at sea due to failing ship (battle, catastrophe, etc)
  - player is stuck on an island unable to sail due to not having minimum crew
  - player is at sea and can't sail due to not having minimum crew



quests:
a random quest is generated for each world. once the quest is completed, another quest (maybe more difficult?) is
generated. Each quest completed is an achievement and adds to score.
Quests consist of artifacts and locations. There will be 1..n artifacts associated with each location.
Once the player has all the artifacts associated with the location and brings them there, that quest is completed
and the next one revealed. Example:
You must find the three dark statues and bring them to the mysterious temple of Ram.

passage of time:
time passes when either sailing or exploring. Other activities are deemed to happen instantly.

Exploring:
each island whether inhabited or not can be explored. The island is explored in percentages, so if returning to an
island later, one can continue exploring. During exploration a few things can happen:
  positive:
  - you find artifacts which can be sold
  - you find information for quests
  - you find water (more than 50% of the time)
  - you find cargo items (gold, animals (livestock), trees (lumber)
  - you have inane conversations with locals
  negative:
  - crew get killed by wild animals, or they run away
  - you lose cargo on the ship due to theft
Each island is given an explore seed so that artifacts, info, water, cargo and conversations will always be the same on that
island. Any other events happening on the island are random and may change when running that world again.

money:
money is in doubloons. At the start you have a supply of these. You must use them to hire crew and stock the ship.
When at port, you will use money to resupply the ship, hire more crew, buy cargo, apply upgrades.
When exploring islands, you must pay for expeditions

upgrades:
better sails - faster travel
increased cargo space - hold more
iron shielding - protects against attacks
better guns - increases offense



crew:
the bulk of the crew consists of able bodied seamen. A fully crewed ship will have 100.
The ABS need to be paid a salary monthly. When their pay is due, the player will be reminded. If they fail to pay
the abs before departing the next port, they will be unable to sail and the game is over. Pay is fixed
regardless of current crew count.
The senior named crew are not paid as they share in the profits of the ship.
The ship can only sail with a minimum of 10 abs. If at sea when this number goes below 10, the game ends.
on town and city islands, crew can always be hired, so the number will always return to 100 when reaching one of these docks.
100-70 crewmembers - the ship sails at speed and does as instructed
69-40 - the ships speed is reduced. less chance in battle
39-10 - in addition to the above, navigation is affected sometimes
9 - 0 - ship can't sail



roles:
boatswain: giving orders to crew, crew discipline
carpenter: repairs upgrades on ship
navigator: in charge of navigating
surgeon: health of the crew
first mate: managing cargo, equipment, supply
lookout: keeping a lookout for islands, other vessels etc
cook: feeding the crew
chaplain: religious figure
gunner: in charge of battles
able bodied seamen (100): regular crew

stock:
food - each crewmember consumes a qty of food per day. Depending on ration level this will differ.
  full ration 100% - crew will remain healthy and happy
  reduced ration 60% - crew will be healthy but will start being dissatisfied. lower performance
  meager ration 40% - crew will start having health issues. lower performance

grog - given daily to crew to keep their spirits up
  full ration - crew will have increased happiness
  half ration - crew will have neither increase nor decrease of happiness
  no ration - crew will start getting dissatisfied

water - given in a fixed amount per day
  if the ship runs out of water, big health problems will arise
  even uninhabited islands can yield water

medical supplies - can be used to treat sick or injured crew
  only consumed when there is sickness or injury
  sickness can occur randomly, due to battle, due to reduced rations

ship supplies - used to keep ship repaired and seaworthy - ropes, lumber, pitch, sails
  Things will wear out on ship. In battles, things can get broken, bad weather can cause things to break
ordnance - used during sea battles


cargo:

Generally things that take a lot of space/weight vs their price will have higher profit yield.

edibles (can be used if ship runs out of food):
GRAIN - Large quantities available. Low price (takes up space). high profit. bigger price swings. can spoil
PRESERVED FOOD - Smaller quantities available. Higher price (less space taken up). lower profit than grain. less price swings
LIVESTOCK - Low price. Can die. High profit.
RUM - low qty available. lower profit. higher price.

non-edibles:
LUMBER - cheapest of non-edibles. high profit. take up lots of space. high availability
IRON - higher price than lumber. lower availability. take up lots of space. high profit
MFG - Low qtys available. take up less space. lower profit. High price.

GOLD - buy/sell price is the same at a place that doesnt produce gold. a place producing gold will be a fixed % cheaper than
       a non-gold producer. All towns/cities will buy/sell gold and the price is tied to a constantly fluctuating gold
       price


game architecture

travel:
Moving between squares takes time. Each square represents a degree of lat/long and is 60 nautical miles in length.
When you are at an island you are always in the center of a square. When you enter a square, you will ALWAYS move
to the center of that square before moving to another square.
Therefore you are always moving toward center or away from center. If you change direction and you are moving toward
center at the time, you will first complete your motion toward the center before moving away from center.

save:
save data is json and is loaded in 2 phases. first phase loads info that doesn't rely on the map. then the map
is generated based on the saved seed, then the rest of the data (trade data, visited data) is loaded
